# react-numerics

A library of React components to render input fields that simplify displaying
formatted numbers such as currency or telephone numbers.

## Need help or have questions?

This project is supported by [Bitovi, an end-to-end JavaScript
consultancy](https://www.bitovi.com/frontend-javascript-consulting/react-consulting)
specializing in React. You can get help or ask questions on our:

- [Discord Channel](https://discord.gg/fBA4HKABve)
- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/bitovi)

Or, you can hire us for training, consulting, or development. [Set up a free
consultation.](https://www.bitovi.com/frontend-javascript-consulting/react-consulting)

## Install

Install the package.

```sh
npm install @bitovi/react-numerics
```

-or-

```sh
yarn add @bitovi/react-numerics
```

## Usage

### Available components

The following types of components are currently available:

|Use|Component|Locales|Note|
|---|---|---|---|
|currency|CurrencyNumberInput|any||
|percent|PercentNumberInput|any||
|phone number|TelephoneNumberInput|en-US|10 digit - area code and exchange required|
|postal code|PostalCodeNumberInput|en-US|5 digit|
|social security number|SocialSecurityNumberInput|US only||
|employer identification number|EmployerIdentificationNumberInput|US only||

Import the component that you need.

```tsx
import { PercentNumberInput } from "@bitovi/react-numerics";

export function Form({ numericValue }: Props) {
  function handleNumericChange(value) {
    // Do something with the value.
  }

  return (
    <PercentNumberInput
      numericValue={numericValue}
      onNumericChange={handleNumericChange}
      validate
    />
  );
}
```

Components require the `numericValue` and `onNumericChange` props. Each
component accepts values for most of the standard `HTMLInputElement` attributes
with the notable exception of `type`.

Each component will render an unstyled `<input>` element with `type` equal to
"text".

### Reference to the input element

Each component implements React's `forwardRef` interface that will return a
reference to the underlying `<input>` element.

```tsx
import { PostalCodeNumberInput } from "@bitovi/react-numerics";

export function Form({ numericValue }: Props) {
  const myRef = React.useRef<HTMLInputElement | null>(null);
  // Once rendered, `myRef.current` is the underlying <input> element.

  function handleNumericChange(value) {
    // Do something with the value.
  }

  return (
    <PostalCodeNumberInput
      numericValue="01970"
      onNumericChange={handleNumericChange}
      ref={myRef}
      validate
    />
  );
}
```

### Validation

As of version 1.3.4 validation is built-in to the current higher order
components as well as being available through interfaces and functionality for
composing new components.

By default validation is **NOT** enabled in components so that it doesn't
interfere with any custom validation that may have been created using a
component's `ref`.

To enable validation add the `validate` prop to a component. When the component
 fails validation the `:invalid` pseudo class will be set on the input element.
The browser's default error UI will be displayed with an English error message;
[this behavior can be changed](#modifying-the-validation-result).

Currently validation is performed when:

- a component first mounts
- the value of an input changes
- a component loses focus (i.e. blur)

#### Modifying the validation result

There are two ways to modify the text of the message that is displayed to the
user, the simplest is to provide a string using the input element's `title`
attribute. If the input is invalid the title is displayed. The same message is
always displayed regardless of the reason the input is invalid.

The most flexible way to alter how a component is validated &#x2014; and the
error text &#x2014; is by adding the `updateCustomValidity` prop with a callback
function. This callback is invoked with three arguments: a `number` which is the
current numeric value, `context` which has information about the conditions the
validator is being invoked under, and `result` that contains the validation
result generated by the default validation.

👉 _If `updateCustomValidity` is provided you do not need to set
`validate=true`; that will be inferred._

The value of `result.customValidity` will be a string constant from
`ValidateErrorTypes` that indicates the type of validation error.

The callback can either return `void` or a `ValidationResult` with the
validation that should be applied. If void is returned the current validity of
the input will not be changed. When returning a `ValidationResult`:

- `customValidity`
  - An empty string `""` will make the input **valid**.
  - Any string will be set as the input's validation message and may be
      displayed to the user.
- `report` if true the input's `reportValidity` method will be invoked and will
  cause the browser to display the value of customValidity, if false the
  validity will be updated but the user will not be informed of the current
  validity status.

The following example illustrates code that sets a localized string for the
error message that will be displayed to the user.

```tsx
import { PostalCodeNumberInput } from "@bitovi/react-numerics";

export function Form({ handleNumericChange, getLocalizedString, numericValue }: Props) {
  function updateCustomValidity(number, context, result) {
    if(result.customValidity){
      // Create a new ValidationResult where the customValidity
      // property is set to a localized string. So for example
      // the constant "INVALID_LESS_THAN_MIN_LENGTH" might
      // result in a string like
      // "El valor del código postal debe tener 5 dígitos."
      return {
        ...result,
        customValidity: getLocalizedString(result.customValidity, { minimum: context.minLength })
      };
    }

    return result;
  }

return (
    <PostalCodeNumberInput
      numericValue={numericValue}
      onNumericChange={handleNumericChange}
      updateCustomValidity={updateCustomValidity}
    />
  );
}
```

## We want to hear from you

Come chat with us about open source in our community
[Discord](https://discord.gg/fBA4HKABve).

See what we're up to by following us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/bitovi).
